

                        BILL OF THE WILD STREAK

                          By Howard E. Morgan




                                  I.


Like shoulders of dirty gray rock, irregular, ghostly under the pale
moonlight, the sheep spread out over the hillside, dozing contentedly.
On the crest of the short slope that was the pasture, a big gray and
white dog sat watching the flock. From time to time he started off in a
businesslike manner and hurried some blundering ewe back into the
moonlit open.

Ordinarily, this close attention was not necessary. Stupid though they
were, most of the sheep knew better than to approach the strip of
checkered shadow bordering the thicket, that was the dividing line
between safety and danger. Just now, however, there were several young
lambs among them, newly born, and the mothers seemed to have lost all
sense of discretion. So at least Bill thought as for the tenth time he
urged an obstinate ewe and her spindle-legged calf away from the forest
edge. Each time, this particular ewe had refused to take his fangless
proddings seriously and in good part; each time she had resented his
interference with her senseless plans, and finally, she charged him,
furiously, with lowered head--so quickly that, as he sprang aside, she
caught him a glancing blow that almost upset him.

The big dog recovered quickly, circled swiftly about and rushed at her,
silently, teeth bared. Not until within half a dozen feet of his
intended victim did he realize what he was doing. It was then too late
to stop. He sprang clear over the ewe and crouched panting in the
shadow of a stump.

Through a necklike opening in the forest came the ring of an ax on
wood. That was the man cutting kindlings for his morning fire. The big
dog cowered. Whined softly. Once more he had nearly proved unfaithful
to the master. For long he lay low, belly to the ground, then came
erect slowly and tail between his legs, again took up his sentinellike
position on the ridge top.

Bill was a mongrel, a splendid mixture of at least four fine strains;
his mother was a sled dog from the Yukon, part chow, part Ungava husky
with a dash of wolf blood running strongly near the surface; his father
was a collie with an interbreeding of mastiff. Bill's hair was long and
thick, like a collie; he was big-boned, broad-chested, like a husky,
his mighty jaws, wide, massive, steel-muscled, were from his maternal
grandsire, the wolf. What wonder, with such varying warlike strains,
that violent passions fought ceaselessly for possession of his mighty
body.

For long after his brush with the sheep, the dog crouched on the
hilltop, motionless and limp. The wild desire that had urged him to
kill, left him slowly and he was forlornly ashamed. However, it was a
familiar sensation, quite. Many times before he had escaped murder by a
hair’s breadth. Each time it had been on account of the master.

His allegiance to Hardin knew no bounds. Once he gave way to the
bloodlust and the master would be lost to him forever. Well he knew.
The sheep belonged to the man. It was the man’s wish that they should
suffer no harm, that their foolish lives be protected at all costs.
Bill had risked his own life times without number in the pursuit of
duty as interpreted by his collie instincts. It was the master’s wish.
But this particular night, the wild urge in him refused to be readily
put aside. From time to time, deep, full-toned growls issued from his
great throat.

The tiny scream of a bugle sounded, echoing sharply back from the
purple hills. Instantly Bill was on his feet and whining eagerly. It
was the man. Hardin had been a soldier. Every night he blew upon the
yellow horn, a never-ending source of wonder and awe to all wilderness
folk. To Bill it recalled a pile of rags and old burlap bags behind the
stove where he slept through the cold winter nights. This concrete
reminder of the master’s nearness banished the last shreds of wildness.
He barked once, sharply, joyously, then circled the herd slowly,
majestically, a sedate, aloof being, competent and ready protector of
the weak, a trusted friend of the master.

This streak of the killer in Bill, Hardin had often suspected. He knew
dogs. But because he did know them, he trusted Bill implicitly. It was
a question of his influence over the wild streak. And he had every
confidence in his ability to hold the big dog’s devotion.

Of one thing only was he uncertain, which was--to just what extent
Bill’s interbreeding had merged. As--in some people--an admixture of
several races will produce an evenly balanced, intelligent whole; and
in others, various racial traits will stand out distinctly--good and
bad, loyalty and treachery, never merging--veritable Dr. Jekylls and
Mr. Hydes; the one at times obliterating the other, the two never
forming an evenly balanced, law-abiding whole--so it was with dogs.

Hardin assumed that Bill’s interbreeding had struck the happy medium.
Many of the most loyal and intelligent of dogs are mongrels. True
Americans. Bill showed no distinctive racial traits. There was little
of the wolf about him. On the surface he was dog, all dog. Home-loving.
Devoted to the sheep and the master. The only thing was his eyes which
at times held a strange, greenish glare.

Not more than half a dozen times Hardin had surprised that wild gleam
in the big dog’s eyes. Each time a single word from him had banished
it. But it was there, the wild streak in him, the bloodlust of the
killer demanding expression. But as time passed, Hardin came to think
less and less about it. Bill was the best sheep dog he had ever owned.

This particular night the man did not visit the herd as was his custom.
He had worked hard during the day walling up with huge stones a spring
that bubbled out of the ground near the cabin--and he was very tired.
He reflected pleasurably upon the fact that the little pond would save
the lives of many sheep during the hot summer days--and--confident in
Bill’s guardianship of the growing herd--he rolled in his blankets and
was soon sleeping soundly.

For long after the metallic clatter of the bugle had died away, Bill
trotted back and forth along the open ridge top, tensely, joyously
expectant, awaiting the arrival of the man. This nightly visit was
always the occasion for a rough and tumble encounter which the dog
enjoyed beyond all else. But the man did not come. Puzzlement gave way
to disappointment, and a great longing, not unmixed with fear, fear
that the master might have gone away. Once before the man had left,
without him, visiting a distant settlement; had stayed several days and
Bill had experienced all the acute sufferings of a sensitive youngster
deprived of its mother for the first time.

Finally, he could stand it no longer and after thrice circling the
herd, thrice assuring himself that all was well, he rushed down the
valley toward the cabin. He came to a sliding stop before the closed
door. Cocked his ears inquiringly, listened intently. The man was
inside. Asleep. His regular breathing was clearly audible to Bill’s
sensitive ears. Reassured, but still vaguely dissatisfied, he trotted
slowly back to the herd.

As he drew near, his step quickened. The sheep were downwind, still, a
sixth sense warned him of danger. A collie would have rushed wildly
forward, barking loudly. Bill advanced silently in a wide half-circle
along the ridge top, belly close-hugging the ground, like the wolf.

It was old Graybeard, the coyote. Bill drew close without the unwelcome
visitor detecting him. The dog did not really think that the coyote
would attack the sheep. It was a time of plenty in the wilderness. Old
Graybeard was sleek and well fed. More likely it was just deviltry.
Graybeard could outrun the sheep dog.

Well he knew it. Bill knew it too. It was the coyote’s delight to steal
upon the unsuspecting sheep, to nip sharply right and left and then to
run away, a wraithlike streak into the night; and from a near-by
hillock grin down as Bill, with much frantic effort, quieted the
milling herd.

Sometimes Bill took this as a joke. Sometimes he went into a rage.
Depending upon his state of mind. To-night--deprived of the softening
influence of his frolic with the man--he was angry. Graybeard knew Bill
was away and took his time. No sport in a practical joke if the jokee
is not there to appreciate it.

He nipped tentatively at a gangling white figure that practically fell
over him where he crouched in a bed of huckleberry bushes. The lamb, a
very young one, bawled frantically. The nip had been as nothing at all.
Graybeard was surprised. But his surprise was many times multiplied
when a ewe, usually the most timid of creatures, charged him wildly,
quite disregarding his menacing front.

At the last moment he danced nimbly aside. Unfortunately for all
concerned, however, the ewe’s splay foot slid from off a moss-covered
bowlder; she lurched sideways, fell, and in falling, knocked Graybeard
neatly off his feet. With a snarl of rage he sprang forward and buried
his yellow fangs in her throat.

At the climax of the tragedy, Bill was no more than a dozen yards away.
He lay stretched flat to the ground among some low-lying shrubs. His
big body was vibrant with righteous rage. Still, he did not move. Well
he knew that, at his first motion, the coyote would flee. And he might
never catch him. Many times he had tried and failed.

Graybeard raised his bloody muzzle and tested the stilly air. It told
him nothing. Bill had worked about downwind. The coyote was not
particularly hungry, but having killed he intended to eat. He worried
savagely at the dead sheep. Bill stole forward, noiseless as a shadow.
The coyote took alarm suddenly. But not quite quickly enough. Even as
he sprang away, Bill was upon him.

Wily old battler that he was, Graybeard was no match for this hundred
pounds of enraged dogflesh. A single flashing downward stroke of the
wolf-like fangs ripped the coyote from shoulder to gullet--and the
fight was over.

For long the victor crouched over the dead body of the coyote, growling
deep in his throat, the light of battle in his eyes. Then the bleating
of the sheep roused him to a sense of duty. The herd had scattered in
all directions over the hillside. He rounded them up in his usual
efficient manner, but they refused to be quieted. He threatened them
savagely. Even nipped them more severely than usual, but all to no
avail. They persisted in stampeding wildly, rushing head-on into stumps
and bowlders and into each other in their excitement.

Bill finally guessed the reason for this continued panic. The dead
coyote. The odor of blood. First, he dragged the body of the coyote to
the edge of a gravel-banked coulee at the foot of the slope and pushed
it in. Then he caught upon the dead sheep. The ewe’s body was still
warm. For the first time in his life he got a taste of fresh, sweet
mutton. He licked his jaws pleasurably. Instantly the wolf in him came
to the surface. His eyes shone with a strange greenish glare. He looked
upon the milling mass of sheep with new eyes, hungry eyes. The dead ewe
was not for him. He would make his own kill. Slowly, cautiously, he
crept toward the herd.

Suddenly a shrill whistle sounded. The man. The sheep had awakened him
with their bawling. Bill froze to the ground. Again the whistle
sounded, nearer this time. Bill whined uncertainly. The wild desire
left him. And as the man’s tall figure appeared on the naked ridge top,
he loped forward slowly to meet him. The man eyed him suspiciously in
the half darkness.

“What’s goin’ on here, you big, no-account bum?”

But his voice was not angry. Bill waved his bushy tail and made gruff,
loving noises in his throat. But he did not come near the outstretched
hand. Instead he turned away abruptly down the hill, ears and tail
drooping. The man followed, puzzled.

“Somethin’s wrong here, sure enough. The old pup ain’t hisself--” And
then--“Sure, I'll betcha, becuz I didn’t come an’ see him t’night.”

Hardin laughed. But in his assumption, this time, he was not correct.
Bill was facing a situation totally unprecedented in his brief
existence. He didn’t know just how the man would take it. The fact that
he had not killed the sheep did not occur to him as a saving grace. He
felt as guilty as though he had actually done the deed. And he was
quite sure that the man would know that he had intended to kill. The
man knew all things. There was no deceiving him.

Bill was sorry. Thoroughly ashamed. And just a bit frightened. The man
would beat him, of course. He might shoot at him as he did at the
coyotes. Drive him away from the cabin perhaps. This last was what
brought about the dejection.

But he had no thought of evading the issue. He led the way straight to
the dead sheep.

After a brief inspection the man swore and shook his head sadly.

“Damn it all. I was afraid of it.”

“C’mere, you worthless houn’ dog.”

Bill drooped in every muscle, but he did not cringe. For long Hardin
eyed the big dog.

“Git out, you--I’m through with you. Git--!”

He caught up a loose stone and poised it above his head. The dog did
not move. A lump rose in the man’s throat. “Git--Git, I tell you--!” He
waved the rock menacingly. He hated to do it, but--

Bill whined and turned suddenly away. He stopped on the edge of the
coulee and whined again. The man hesitated, then dropped the rock and
caught up a handful of dry grass from a dead bog, lit it and peered
down. He saw the body of the coyote.

“Doggone--I should have known, Bill; you didn’t kill that there sheep.
The herd wouldn’t have got so wild unless it had been a coyote ’r a
bear ’r somethin’. Doggone, now, ain’t I ashamed. Sure enough purty
nigh plugged you, too, didn’t I? C’mere, boy--”




                                  II.


In the days that followed, the dog and the man were inseparable, made
much of each other, like friends reunited after a serious
misunderstanding. Under these pleasant conditions Bill experienced no
recurrence of the wild streak. In constant touch with the man, the dog
in him was always uppermost.

His thoughts revolved about the man, followed interestedly his every
action. Construction of the little pond seemed to him a foolish thing,
but he knew that there was some good reason for it. The man apparently
wasted his time on many foolish things, but always, sooner or later, an
adequate reason for them developed. So it would be with the pond.

And one hot day in early summer, the man’s wisdom was made manifest.
The heat was intense. The sun a vivid red ball in a saffron sky. Man,
dog and sheep sweltered helplessly. It was then that the man helped
Bill drive the sheep around the base of the ridge to the pond. They
floundered in the cool water to their hearts’ content all the rest of
the day.

One night at dusk a short, white-skinned man made his appearance at the
little cabin. He made much of Bill, but the latter accepted his
advances unemotionally; remained briskly, unresponsively aloof. The
white-skinned man meant nothing to him. He didn’t understand him in the
first place. And then again, he was just a bit jealous. As a friend of
the master, however, the man was, of course, to be treated with the
greatest respect.

Well he knew that to obey the frequent urge to nip the visitor’s
inexpert fingers as they rubbed his ears the wrong way, was to bring
the master’s instant displeasure. The two men talked much together. The
visitor stayed on and on and with the passing of each day the master
became more and more preoccupied and Bill grew correspondingly
depressed. He whined dismally on the ridgetop through the long, hot
nights. Something unpleasant was going to happen. And it did. On the
fourth night the bugle did not sound. Next morning, the cabin was
deserted. Bill did not know it, of course, but the man’s little
homestead lay in the center of valuable timber country; the
white-skinned man had been negotiating for its purchase and Hardin had
gone to town to consummate the deal. All he knew was that the master
had gone and that he was very, very lonesome.

All of the next day and night he circled the herd like an automaton,
time and again rushing away to the cabin, whining dismally before the
door.

He became nervous and crotchety. On the second night he picked a
quarrel with a wolverine and was severely mauled. He even disputed the
right of way with a pink-nosed porcupine and collected half a dozen
barbed quills for his pains. Most of these quills came to rest in his
upper forelegs; after much painful worrying, he pulled them out with
his teeth. A couple, however, worked into his wrinkled snout and defied
his most heroic efforts.

It may have been the lack of contact with the man; it may have been the
porcupine quills that festered and rendered him feverish with pain and
rage--most likely a combination of both--at any rate--on the third
night after the man had left--the old craving to kill came upon him in
a flood of sentient desire that would not be denied. A big ewe gave
birth to a gangling lamb in a cluster of oak scrub on the forest edge.
All of his efforts to drive her back into the herd and safety, were
unavailing. Finally, enraged, he rushed silently upon her.

Five minutes later, four dead sheep bore irrefragable evidence of his
lustful efforts. The murders done, he slunk away into the forest,
swiftly, silently, furtively, like the wolf. But--in his going was none
of the arrogant bearing of his rapacious forebear. The passion to kill
left him as suddenly as it had come. He went--tail between his legs,
head drooping, like a dog. And he knew that he might never return.




                                  III.


Hours later, Hardin entered upon the scene of carnage. It did not need
sight of the bloody-jowled creature that slunk guiltily away into the
thicket upon his approach, to tell him the name of the murderer. He
knew. All about were tracks. Dog tracks. Bill’s tracks.

The man swore in a frightful manner. His face was white with rage. His
business in town had not turned out well; he was tired and hungry and
hot--there were other troubles, too; and now--this. The rifle leaped to
his shoulder. Five shots followed the slinking figure of his erstwhile
friend into the thicket. And he laughed when a yelp of pain told him
that one of his shots, at least, had found its mark.

In his heart the man was kind and it is doubtful if he would have
nursed his hard feelings against the erring dog if it had not been for
his other troubles; the girl back in the States, for instance, who had
married another; and the lumber people who were trying to rob him. The
man was the sort that sours under difficulties. It seemed that everyone
and everything was against him.

Alone with his thoughts, he longed for an opportunity to give vent to
his vengeful feelings. Of his real and fancied enemies, Bill was
nearest at hand. Hence it was that he carried his long rifle with him
wherever he went, hoping ever for a chance shot at his unfaithful
friend.

Hardin knew dogs and he felt sure that Bill could not stay away for
long. One day--he would come back. When he did--the rifle would be
ready at hand. In the man’s hardened heart there was no room for
clemency; to his mind, the renegade sheep dog was no different from any
other killer of sheep--the coyote or the wolf. In fact, he was worse,
if anything.

From a neighbor, Hardin purchased another sheep dog, a lazy old collie
called Stub--Stub because a bear trap had claimed all but six inches of
his bushy tail. The collie was a good enough sheep dog as sheep dogs
go, but his cringing docility found no response in the man’s spirited
nature.

The random shot from the man’s rifle had torn a deep groove along
Bill’s ribs. The wound did not respond readily to his frequent
cleansings, festered and would not heal. For several days he was very
ill, lay close hidden in the alder swamp. He reverted naturally to a
health-giving diet of tansy and coarse grasses.

At the end of a week the wound began to heal. So also did his sore
nose. And with the first sign of returning good health came an
irresistible yearning to return to the old life.

The whispering silences of the alder swamp appalled him. He was
restless and nervous. He longed for the sheep; they had become a part
of his very self. He longed for the cabin, the heap of old burlap bags
behind the stove, the bits of fish and half-cooked meat; but above all,
he longed for the little things--the boisterous rompings, the kind
words, the rough caress--which only the man, his man, could bestow.

Came a night when he crawled out of his hiding place and made his way
slowly, uncertainly toward the pasture. He was still very weak.
Tottered when he walked. At first glimpse of the fat old dog, Stub, he
flew into a great rage. If his strength had permitted he would at once
have challenged the collie to battle. But discretion fortunately
prevailed. He merely crouched low at the edge of the thicket, teeth
bared in a perpetual snarl--and watched.

Every night thereafter, he occupied the same spot among the gray
shadows bordering the swamp. He saw the man inspecting the flock and
growled lovingly. But sight of the rifle brought him to his senses. The
man would shoot him--he knew.

When Hardin returned to the cabin he trailed along--at a distance. With
ears cocked inquiringly, head on one side, he followed longingly the
man’s preparations for supper. Later, when the cabin was in darkness,
he stole forward furtively and searched for scraps. He found only a
large strip of pork rind which ordinarily he would have ignored. But
now--he swallowed it gratefully and hunted for more. With the coming of
night he returned to the pasture and during the few short hours of
darkness, unseen, unsuspected, assisted Stub in guarding the herd.

But with the complete return of his strength, this vicarious enjoyment
of things once his own, did not satisfy. Came a night when he openly
fronted the collie on the ridgetop. The latter was game and flew
clumsily at Bill’s throat. Bill easily evaded him. The tussle was brief
and bloodless. Bill could easily have killed the collie; instead, he
merely rolled him over on his back and fastened his great teeth gently
but firmly in the other’s throat, barely breaking the skin.

Stub saw the light. The fight went out of him. Thereafter the herd was
Bill’s. He might have killed to his heart’s content had he so desired.
But there was nothing further from his thoughts. Instead he took over
his old job. Stub soon came to take these nightly visits as a matter of
course, and slept peacefully on his favorite bed of pine needles while
Bill watched the sheep.

And then one day Bill came face to face with the man. From the summit
of a grassy knoll Bill had espied the familiar figure and had circled
about in a wide arc to come in behind him without being seen. He was
curious, as always, to know what the master was about. He felt sure
that the man would follow the beaten path through the swamps. But he
didn’t. Hence it was that they came face to face in a grassy, open
glade flanked by a dense thicket of alder.

By not so much as a quiver of his bushy tail did the big dog betray the
conflicting emotions pounding through his tense body. Only his eyes
softened, dog-like, with mute appeal when he saw the anger that was in
the man’s heart suddenly reflected in the sun-browned face.

Hardin, fortunately for the dog, had left his rifle at the cabin.
Mumbling to himself he searched the ground for a loose rock or a stick,
but finding neither he drew his knife, cut a sturdy sapling and set
about fashioning it into a club. Bill did not move. He sensed
uncertainty in the man’s actions. Truth to tell, Hardin was hoping that
the dog would go away. He trimmed the heavy stick in a most leisurely
manner, then, as the dog still remained motionless, he advanced
determinedly and with fixed purpose, club raised.

But his heart somehow wasn’t in it. He swung wildly. Missed purposely.
The dog’s thick roach-hair lifted automatically. He snarled.
Involuntarily. Not in anger. But this outward indication of defiance
was enough to rekindle the man’s smoldering rage. Next time, the club
found its mark, again, and still again. The dog made no sound, but
backed away slowly under the shower of blows, into the thicket, lips
still lifted in a fixed snarl, but with a questioning, appealing look
in his eyes that, despite all, tempered the force that lay behind the
club.

Following the encounter, Hardin was sheepishly displeased with himself,
ashamed, like a man after too severely beating a youngster in a fit of
anger. He left off carrying the rifle, knowing in his heart that he
would not shoot the dog if he had the chance. As a matter of fact he
rather hoped that Bill would one day come back to him. He convinced
himself readily that the dog had learned its lesson, would never again
become a killer. For witness--the sheep were still there; lazy old Stub
would have proved of little hindrance if the big wolf dog had really
wanted another taste of fresh mutton.

That appealing look in his old friend’s eyes haunted the man for days.




                                  IV.


The sultry dog days of August brought distress in varying degrees to
all wilderness folk. There had been no rain for weeks. A dry blight
struck all green things; the poplar leaves turned prematurely yellow
and fell away; the hardy wire grass in the pasture became brown and
dry. Unfit even for the sheep. With Stub’s help, Hardin drove the herd
a mile farther down the valley where the feed was somewhat better.

The swamp itself, usually a summer paradise for all water-loving
animals, was but a morass of tangled roots and tinder-dry bogs,
surrounded by odorous pools of fetid green slime. On the upland slopes
the rabbits perished by the thousand. The shortage of food and water
drove many mountain dwellers to the lowlands. Several gaunt and silent
moose visited Kootenai Swamp, searched eternally among the few
remaining mudholes for lily roots. Many wolves, lions, bears, caribou,
deer, and hosts of lesser animals, all left their footprints in the
newly formed runway leading to the man’s pond which was the only
running water for miles about.

An ever-growing restless uncertainty, attended by a corresponding
shortening of temper, affected all the beasts alike. This unsettled
state of mind brought about many bloody quarrels. A caribou bull and a
big cougar staged a battle to the death in Kootenai Swamp not a quarter
of a mile from the cabin. A black bear and a silver-tip grizzly fought
on the ridge top near the old pasture.

As might be expected, the sheep formed an irresistible attraction for
the hungry visitors. One and all, singly and in pairs, they
investigated with longing eyes. One and all, they gauged the chances
involved in breaking through the guard of that confident,
competent-appearing beast--that was neither dog nor wolf, yet bigger
and more menacing than either--whose watchful eyes seemed never to
close.

Each one was duly impressed. The wisest among them decided to devote
their efforts for the time being to easier, if less palatable, prey.
There were still plenty of rabbits scattered in the neighborhood of the
lowlands.

It devolved upon a young cougar, arrogant with the inexperience and
optimism of youth, to make the first attempt. For hours he lay well
hidden in the crotch of a long-limbed beech tree not a dozen yards from
the huddled flock of sheep. Bill knew he was there, had known it from
the first, but he made no sign. After waiting half the night for the
cougar to declare his intentions he purposely allowed an arbitrary old
ram, who could take care of himself if the exigency demanded, to wander
near the beech tree.

The cougar sprang. But his claws never so much as touched the ram. Bill
was upon him before he struck the ground. Luckily perhaps for the dog,
the cougar was young and unskilled in the niceties of mixed warfare. At
any rate, the hissing, growling, clutching combatants soon fell apart,
disclosing the lion stretched out at full length--quite dead. Outside
of a few scratches, Bill was uninjured.

Came a night when the prevailing nervous uncertainty among the
wilderness peoples broke out suddenly into frantic hysteria. Great and
small, they rushed wildly here and there in apparently aimless,
panic-stricken flight. The thickets were filled with strange noises.
Flocks of birds, squawking and screaming, shrilled overhead, all
tending toward the east.

The gray night air was hazy, stiflingly hot, despite a lively breeze.
The western sky reflected a dull pinkish glow. Even Stub, roused from
his perpetual nap, sniffed the air and whined querulously up at the
heavens. Bill circled the restless herd at a swinging lope, nose high
in air, listening intently, striving to learn what it was all about.
Something was wrong, he knew. But what? It was that which puzzled him.

A miniature whorl of wind dropping down out of the sky gave him the
answer. Fire. Although he had never before been through a forest fire,
he realized instinctively its menace. His first thought was of the
sheep. It was up to him to protect them. Alone, unencumbered by
responsibility, he would have sought out the nearest body of water.
This through no conscious mental effort; instinct merely, dictating
that this was the thing to do. Every other living thing experienced the
same vital urge. So it was that with swift, sure maneuvering, he turned
the unwieldy herd of milling sheep toward that spot where lay the
cabin--and the man’s pond.

Hardin was awakened by the excited bleating of the sheep. He caught up
the rifle and hurried outside, assured that something was wrong.

The sight that met his eyes brought furious curses to his lips. The
cabin faced the east and was located at the base of a fifty-foot bank
of shale, so that he got no warning of the oncoming wall of fire which
already tinged the western sky with coruscant flares of scarlet and
yellow. Nor did he at once identify the pungent odor that accompanied
the hot breeze. The sum total of his first impression was a bawling,
straggling mass of wild-eyed sheep harassed by a savage dog whose jowls
and body were streaked with blood. Even as he watched, Bill charged a
persistently wayward ewe silently and furiously; she careened wildly to
one side, crashed into the oncoming herd. Several sheep piled over her.
Bill dived into the struggling mass, growling fiercely, nipping sharply
with his great teeth. Speed at that very moment was the principal
thing.

Even now the flames were licking along the ridgetop. Bill knew. There
was no time to spare. But Hardin did not know. He thought only that the
dog had again turned killer. The rifle spat fire, once--twice. At the
first shot Bill’s feet flew from under him. He hurtled forward, nose
burrowing into the sand. The second shot found its mark as he lay
writhing on the ground.

Mumbling incoherently with rage, Hardin hurried after the sheep. And
then, abruptly--he felt the hot breath of the fire--caught the vivid
reflection in the sky. A dead tree on the near horizon burst suddenly
into flames. The man was stunned for a moment. Then understanding came
to him.

Bill had not turned killer. Instead, he had saved the sheep. And that,
too, strange to say, in the face of the fire. But now--he was dead.

A lump rose in the man’s throat. Remorse filled his heart. The flames
were now raging along the ridge top in plain sight and in the sudden
glare he made out the big dog hitching painfully along the ground
toward the cabin. The man was glad. He cried out happily. Waved his
gun. Called encouragingly. Once in the cabin the dog would be safe. Of
this he was certain. The flames would split on either side of the
cliff, thus avoiding the cabin altogether.

Most of the sheep were already in the water urged by Stub’s lumbering
efforts. By the time Hardin had thrust the last reluctant lamb into the
pond the flames were sweeping up from the swamp, accompanied by
flame-shot billows of acrid smoke.

The heat was stifling. The man sprawled close to the ground. The
blistering heat waves seared his body like hot irons. And then--as a
smoke cloud lifted--he saw--the unexpected had happened. The cabin was
in flames. And--the injured dog was in the cabin.

Without an instant’s hesitation the man sprang into action. He
scrambled into the pool, drenched his few clothes thoroughly, then,
bending low, ran toward the cabin. Before the door he fell, gasping and
coughing. Dropped face down in the sand and with his first full breath,
called out encouragingly: “Stay put, old timer--I’m a comin’.”

The cabin door had blown shut and as he kicked it open a gust of flame
enveloped him. Again he dropped to the ground and rolled over and over
in frantic effort to extinguish his burning clothing. Ignoring his many
burns the man pushed on into the cabin.

Bill lay behind the big Yukon stove on his old bed of burlap bags. His
beautiful body was smeared with blood from his battle with the cougar
and the man’s bullets. His eyes were half closed. He was breathing with
difficulty in short, choking gasps. The man crawled to him over the
dirt floor. Sank exhausted. Roused as the hungry flames licked his
smoke-blackened face, lifted the dog in his arms and stumbled out,
almost exhausted, through the flame-filled doorway.

Crouching in the pool, the big dog still in his arms, with no thought
of his own hurts Hardin took stock of Bill’s injuries. One of the
bullets had broken a foreleg, the other had torn a ragged hole through
the thick muscles of the neck. Painful, not necessarily fatal. Hardin
was well versed in rough surgery. While the roaring of the fire
diminished in the distance and the sheep one by one floundered out of
the steaming pool, he prepared splints for the broken leg, and as he
worked he talked:

“I didn’t mean t’ do it, ol’ pup. Honest. Don’t know whut I was
thinkin’ of--wy, doggone, if I had a mite o’ sense I would of known.
But you know me, Bill--I ain’t got no more brains that a--than a--than
one o’ them sheep. Yeah, that’s right--I ain’t got no more sense than a
sheep--an’ you an’ me knows as how that ain’t much. But this is whut I
was goin’ t’ tell you--me an’ you is goin’ away. Yeah, sure enough. I
sold these here sheep t’ Sam Dodd. You remember Sam. Kinda wisht I’d
sold t’ them lumber fellers now--the skunks--wouldn’t we have the laugh
on ’em, after this; serve ’em right, too. Anyhow, you an’ me is goin’
away, like I said--away up yender some place--where they ain’t no
sheep. Jest you an’ me--that’s the life, eh, pup--jest you an’ me--”

Some things the man said were a bit confusing. Never before had he made
such a long speech; but his words were kind. The gist of it was quite
clear. All was forgiven. All was well. And despite his many hurts, Bill
was very happy. To show that he was in sympathetic agreement with
whatever the master had in mind, he wiggled his tail feebly and reached
for the man’s smoke-blackened face with his tongue.


[Transcriber’s note: This story appeared in the April 18, 1925 issue
of _Argosy-Allstory Weekly_ magazine.]